What is API?
The API is a key method for communicating between systems to retrieve key information without 
doing the backend processing. All these have a different architecture and use cases. There
are three popularly known APIs and they are:
• REST
• WEB
• SOAP
REST (Representational State Transfer) is a web-based application programming 
interface. This API adheres to the REST Architectural methodology.
REST main purpose is to provide the foundation, and this enables a user to build web 
services. These web services are later consumed by various clients. Besides supporting 
these clients, REST API Architecture can also include web, mobile, and desktop 
applications. The standard protocol used to communicate on the internet is HTTP, and REST 
is based on HTTP. The standard HTTP methods, like post, put, get, and delete, are used by 
REST API to execute the various operations on the resources. To identify the resource 
responses, a unique URL e.g., https//example.com/unique-url, is used. The responses returned 
are always stored either in JSON or XML format.
REST API adheres to the stateless client-server model, which is REST API’s unique 
feature. The major benefit of the stateless model is that the server does not store any 
information about the client state during the requests. Each of the requests contains all the 
essential information necessary for the server to process the request. This distinct
architecture has made REST API scalable and easy to maintain.
When to use the REST API
The use of REST API can be classified into the following:
• REST API provides developers the best advantage in building a stateless web 
service. It is browser friendliness.
• It enables a developer to build web services that demand flexibility, and scalability, by 
utilizing easy maintenance architecture.
• REST API is the best methodology for building applications that require CRUD 
operations. (Create, Read, Update, and Delete)
• REST API is also feasible to build real-time communication applications, such as 
Chat/Bot applications and streaming services (e.g., Messenger, Skype, WhatsApp, 
Netflix, Disney Hotstar, and Amazon Prime.


When to use the SOAP 
SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) is a web-based application programming 
interface. SOAP API is used as a communicating protocol, to exchange structured data 
between non-identical applications, unrestrained of the platform or programming language. 
XML is the most common format to store data independent of any programming language.
XML is used as a universal format for data on the web, so XML scripting language is 
utilized to store and receive data. The XML language enables a developer to deliver rich, 
and structured data to the client and can support a list of data types, like text, numbers, 
dates, and binary data. 
SOAP API has platform-independent features, that enable to support multiple transport 
protocols - HTTP, SMTP, and FTP. To assist in exchanging messages between applications, 
SOAP API has a defined standardized set of rules. The add-on feature of SOAP API is its 
ability to provide advanced security mechanisms like digital signatures and encryptions. This 
gives confidence that the application is secure and can never be trespassed by unauthorized 
users.
